Pathogencity
============

CNVs are susceptible to evolutionary selection and are associated with a wide range of human disease :cite:`a-zhang2009copy`. A potential approach to describe the pathogencity of CNVs, as presented by Ganel et al. :cite:`a-ganel2017svscore`, is to focus on deleteriousness and employ single-nucleotide scores such as the Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion or CADD score :cite:`a-kircher2014general`, aggregating them over the nucleotides hit by the CNV. The basis for CADD are two sets of variants: One set of fixed or nearly fixed SNVs and another with simulated de novo variants. The variants were annotated using a total of 63 distinct annotations such as Polyphen and SIFT and multiple support vector machines were trained to differentiate between the two classes. The trained models could then be used to determine deleteriousness measurements for all possible SNPs in the human genome. When aggregating CADD scores or any other score developed for SNPs over larger intervals such as CNVs there are two major issues that have to be addressed: Computing the average is only viable, if the average score expresses the same meaning as for the single nucleotides, which is not always the case. The assumption that the same selective pressure and therefore the same deleteriousness of SNPs also applies to CNVs does not hold. The impact of CNVs on the functionality of the organism is likely to be significantly different compared to the effect of SNPs. In coding regions the effect of SNPs is often quantified by the resulting changes to the protein product. There are either synonymous or nonsynonymous SNPs. Synonymous SNPs do not change the protein sequence while nonsynonymous i.e. nonsense or missense variants do. CNVs do not change the protein sequence through substitution of single bases. Their effect on genes has rather been analyzed in terms of dosage changes :cite:`a-lupski1992gene`. Consequently, if a gene is sensitive to dosage changes, also called haploinsufficient, the impact of a CNV is likely to be greater than if its hits any haplosufficient gene :cite:`a-huang2010characterising`.  Intolerance to dosage change is usually not considered in any method that aggregates deleteriousness or pathogenicity scores for SNPs to describe the functional impact of CNVs. However, haploinsufficency is only one aspect that has to be considered when quantifying the functional impact of CNVs. Non-coding CNVs cannot be identified as potentially pathogenic by using predictions of haploinsufficiency scores as presented by Huang et al. :cite:`a-huang2010characterising`. 

The concept of TADA's approach to pathogenicity of CNVs is to curate a selection of annotations to best describe coding and non-coding regions and consider any overlap of a CNVs as an indicator of increased functional impact. The functional annotation and TADs as well as their role in the assessment of pathogenicity of CNVs is further discussed in the following subsections. Even though I describe most of the important details concerning TADs in the next subsection, I did not include a full overview of the processes involved in their formation and a comparison across species. A more comprehensive review was conducted by Szabo et al. :cite:`a-szabo2019principles`.

.. bibliography:: references.bib
   :style: plain
   :labelprefix: A
   :keyprefix: a-
